Mark Scheme (Results)
Summer 2017

Pearson Edexcel GCE A Level
in Economics A (9EC0)
Paper 01 Markets and Business Behaviour
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK's largest awarding
body. We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational,
occupational and specific programmes for employers. For further information visit our
qualifications websites at www.edexcel.com or www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can
get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at
www.edexcel.com/contactus.

Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere
Pearson aspires to be the world's leading learning company. Our aim is to help
everyone progress in their lives through education. We believe in every kind of
learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they are in the world. We've been involved
in education for over 150 years, and by working across 70 countries, in 100
languages, we have built an international reputation for our commitment to high
standards and raising achievement through innovation in education. Find out more
about how we can help you and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk

Summer 2017
Publications Code 9EC0_01_1706_MS
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Ltd 2017
General marking guidance

  All candidates must receive the same treatment. Examiners must mark

  the last candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the first.

  Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be

  rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than be penalised for

  omissions.

  Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme - not according to

  their perception of where the grade boundaries may lie.

  All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded.

  Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer

  matches the mark scheme. Examiners should also be prepared to award zero

  marks if the candidate's response is not worthy of credit according to the mark

  scheme.

  Where some judgement is required, mark schemes will provide the

  principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification/indicative content

  will not be exhaustive.

  When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the mark

  scheme to a candidate's response, a senior examiner must be consulted before

  a mark is given.

  Crossed-out work should be marked unless the candidate has replaced it

  with an alternative response.
Question  Answer                                               Mark
Number
1(a)                 Application 2, Knowledge 2                (4)
                                                               Mark
          Application:                                         (1)
          Accurate insertion of data in both columns in table
          (either fully or as far as the new equilibrium).
          (1+1 marks)

          Price   Quantity   Quantity  New        New
          £       demanded   supplied  Quantity   Quantity
                  per month  per       demanded   supplied
                  (000)      month     per month  per
                             (000)     (000)      month
                                                  (000)
          25      5          9         8          10
                                                  9
          24      6          8         9          8
                                                  7
          23      7          7         10         6

          22      8          6         11

          21      9          5         12

          Knowledge/understanding:
          Calculation of new equilibrium price of £24 (1) and
          quantity of 9 000 (1)

          NB do not award for quantity of 9

          Award full marks for £24 and 9 000

Question  Answer
Number    C
1(b)
Question  Answer                                                  Mark
Number                                                            (2)
2(a)                                         Application 2

          Application: 1 mark for applying the formula and 1
          mark for the correct answer

              -21.65% ÷ 17.78% (1) = -1.2 (1)

          Correct calculations of both percentages
          accept (-) 0.217 and (-) 0.178 = 1 mark

          NB if the answer given is -1.2 or 1.2, award 2
          marks

Question  Answer                                                  Mark
Number                                                            (2)
2(b)                               Knowledge 1, Analysis 1

          Knowledge/understanding:
          1 mark for original and new sales revenue
          Original sales revenue: £7.20 × 97 million = £698.4
          million

          New sales revenue: £8.48 × 76 million = £644.5 million

          Analysis:

          1 mark for the change in revenue: -£53.9 million

          (accept close approximation, for example a fall of
          £54 million)

          NB if the answer given is -53.9m/53.9m award 2
          marks (this may be stated as -7.7% or 7.7%)

          NB If million is missing from the answer award up
          to 1 mark
Question  Answer                                                  Mark
Number    B
2(c)

Question  Answer                                                  (1)
Number                                                            Mark
3(a)                                      Application 2
                                                                  (2)
          Application:
          568 × 1.8 million (1)
          Accept 1022 million or 1022.4 million for 2 marks.
          Accept 1,022,400,000

          NB If million is missing from the answer award up
          to 1 mark

Question  Answer                                                  Mark
Number                                                            (2)
3(b)                                      Application 2

          Application:
          1 mark for the percentage of subsidy for consumers:
          71 ÷ 568 X 100 = 12.5% (1)

          1 mark for the percentage of subsidy received by
          producers:
          497 ÷ 568 X 100 = 87.5% (1)

          Award 1 mark if the answers are transposed

          NB if no correct calculations, award up to 1 mark for:
          correct annotation of diagram depicting consumer and
          producer subsidy areas

          OR the actual consumer subsidy per unit (71 rupees)
          and producer subsidy per unit (497 rupees)

          OR consumer subsidy (127.8 million rupees) and
          Producer subsidy (894.6 million rupees)
Question  Answer  Mark
Number    A       (1)
3(c)
Question  Answer                                                     Mark
Number
4(a)                             Knowledge 2, Application 2

          1 mark for: profits are likely to fall (this may be shown
          on the diagram)

          1 mark for the decrease in the average revenue and
          marginal revenue curves (accept a pivotal movement of
          the AR and MR curves)

          1 mark for the new equilibrium output and price
          positions at new MC = MR

          1 mark for the original area of supernormal profit.

          1 mark for the new smaller area of supernormal profit/
          loss.

          Diagram required e.g.

          Costs,
          Revenue

          Pe               Original SNP       MC
          P1                                               AC

                  New SNP                                    AR

                                              AR1

          0                Q1  Qe                  Quantity

                                              MR

                                         MR1

          Accept alternative diagram, e.g.:
               Total revenue and total costs diagram
                                                                                                         (4)
Question  Answer                                              Mark
Number    B                                                   (1)
4(b)

Question  Answer                                              Mark
Number    D                                                   (1)
5(a)

Question  Answer                                              Mark
Number                                                        (2)
5(b)                               Knowledge 1, Analysis 1

          Fixed costs remain the same as output increases or
          decreases (1)
          Variable costs vary directly with output. (1)
Question  Answer                                                    Mark
Number                                                              (2)
5(c)                                         Application 2
          Application: 1 mark for applying the formula
          1 mark for workings: e.g.
          13 × 227 ÷ 100, 13% of 227 (1)
          Award 2 marks for correct answer 29.5 (accept
          answer between 29 and 30)

Question  Answer                                                    Mark
Number                                                              (5)
6(a)                   Knowledge 1, Application 1, Analysis 3

          Knowledge/Understanding: 1 mark for:
          Understanding or definition of a concentration ratio (1)

          Application: 1 mark for reason e.g.
          Change in shopping habits which has led to consumers
          shopping more frequently in discount stores/online
          shopping from other retailers (1)
           OR
          The smaller discount stores such as Aldi and Lidl have
          increased their market share (1)

          Analysis:
          Award further marks for linked developments e.g.
          because Aldi and Lidl focus on low prices so their sales
          have risen faster than those of the big four (1) more
          convenient to shop at local stores (1)

          The four firm concentration ratio has decreased by 3.6
          percentage points (2)

            OR
          Calculation of the four firm concentration ratio in 2010
          (30.8 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 11.6 = 76.1%) (1)
          Calculation of the four firm concentration ratio in 2015
          (28.6 + 16.5 + 16.5 + 10.9 = 72.5%) (1)
Question  Indicative content                                     Mark
Number                                                           (8)
6(b)               Knowledge 2, Application 2, Analysis 4

               Definition of monopsony
               Food prices likely to fall

                   Effects on food suppliers might include:
               Financial problems from delays in receiving

                   payments from supermarkets (Extract A)
               Lower prices mean a reduction in revenue and

                   profits
               Increased costs due to paying excessive amounts

                   for packaging and promotions.
               Losses may even be made
               Pressure on suppliers to cut costs
               Fall in employment
               Some food suppliers may exit the industry
               Less funds for investment
               Risk that suppliers will reduce product quality
               Figure 2 indicates some supermarkets abused

                   their market power e.g. Tesco and Morrisons.

                   Effects on consumers might include:
               Lower prices mean higher consumer surplus
               Impact on food waste
               Impact of cost cutting measures on quality of

                   food and consumer choice.

          NB for a Level 3 response, candidates must
          consider both food suppliers and consumers in
          their answer. Answers must refer to the context.
Level    Mark  Descriptor
Level 1  0
Level 2  1-2   A completely inaccurate response.
         3-5
Level 3        Displays isolated or imprecise knowledge and understanding
         6-8   of terms, concepts, theories and models.
               Use of generic or irrelevant information or examples.
               Descriptive approach which has no chains of reasoning or
               links between causes and consequences.
               Displays elements of knowledge and understanding of
               economic principles, concepts and theories.
               Applies economic ideas and relates them to economic
               problems in context, although does not focus on the broad
               elements of the question.
               A narrow response; chains of reasoning are developed but
               the answer may lack balance.

               Demonstrates accurate knowledge and understanding of the
               concepts, principles and models.
               Ability to link knowledge and understanding in context using
               relevant and focused examples which are fully integrated.
               Economic ideas are carefully selected and applied
               appropriately to economic issues and problems. The answer
               demonstrates logical and coherent chains of reasoning.
Question   Answer                                                       Mark
Number                                                                  (4)
6(b)                                       Evaluation 4
continued
                Food suppliers may be able to increase efficiency
                    and so remain profitable and stay in the industry.

                Supermarkets may be reluctant to use their
                    monopsony power for fear of GCA, government
                    investigation and possible fines up to 1% of sales
                    revenue.

                Consumers may not benefit since supermarkets
                    may not pass on lower costs in the form of lower
                    prices.

                Supermarket sector may not be a monopsony as
                    there is more than one buyer -so perhaps less
                    power over food suppliers.

                According to Figure 2 some supermarkets may
                    not abuse their position e.g. Aldi and Sainsbury.

                Long term implications: exit of firms may risk
                    supplies to consumers.

                Consideration of bilateral monopoly e.g. large
                    food supply firms or cooperatives.

                Food suppliers may diversify e.g. farm shops.
                Food suppliers may undertake vertical

                    integration.

Level      Mark  Descriptor
Level 1    0
Level 2    1-2   No evaluative comments.

           3-4   Identification of generic evaluative comments without
                 supporting evidence/ reference to context.
                 No evidence of a logical chain of reasoning.

                 Evaluative comments supported by relevant reasoning and
                 appropriate reference to context.
                 Evaluation recognises different viewpoints and/or is critical of
                 the evidence.
Question  Answer                                                        Mark
Number                                                                  (8)
6(c)               Knowledge 2, Analysis 2, Application 2,
                                           Evaluation 2

          Knowledge/understanding: 2 marks for identification
          of two measures (1+1)

          Analysis: 2 marks for linked explanation of these
          measures (1+1)

          Application: 2 marks for reference to data (1+1), e.g.

               Fines - GCA can fine supermarkets up to 1% of
                   annual revenue (1)

               Regulation to ensure payments made within
                   standard time (1)

               Price regulation e.g. minimum pricing - to ensure
                   fair prices are paid for supplies (1) /relevant
                   diagram (1)

               Promote new entrants and further competition in
                   supermarket sector (1)

               Block mergers if it leads to increased monopsony
                   power (1)

          Evaluation: 2 marks for two evaluative comments,
          OR 2 marks for identification and linked development
          e.g.

               Asymmetric information may lead to regulator
                   making incorrect decisions (1) e.g. too lenient or
                   too harsh on supermarkets (1)

               Regulatory capture may arise (1)
               Regulator may lack resources to investigate

                   supermarket sector thoroughly (1)
               Problems of gaining accurate information from

                   suppliers (1) as they are reluctant to complain (1)
               CMA may allow mergers (1) which increase

                   monopsony power of supermarkets (1)
               Government may counteract monopsony power

                   by protecting farmers' income e.g. subsidies
                   (1+1)
               Problems of minimum price e.g. excess
                   supply/food waste (1)
Question  Indicative content                                            Mark
Number                                                                  (6)
6(d)                Knowledge 2, Application 2, Analysis 2

               Identification of information gaps as a cause of
                   market failure

                   Information gaps as main cause of food
                   waste e.g.
               Food suppliers lack market information: e.g.
                   predicting size of harvests - dependent on
                   climate/ pest control and disease/ time lags in
                   growing crops and raising livestock.
               Supermarkets lack market information: e.g.
                   predicting household demand - depends on tastes
                   and fashion which may change/ population and
                   migration changes/ impact of competitors.
               Consumers lack market information: e.g.
                   uncertainty over how to store food or whether
                   food is fit for consumption after sell-by dates.

                   Irrational behaviour as main cause of food
                   waste e.g.
               Computation issues e.g. consumers perceived
                   demand may exceed actual demand for food /
                   difficulty in comparing the different size of food
                   products to fit with the actual amount of food
                   required.
               Habitual behaviour e.g. consumers may have a
                   tendency to purchase more food than required/
                   better to have too much than too little food.
               Influence of other people's behaviour e.g.
                   consumers may purchase food that they might
                   not want.
               Impulse buying e.g. due to advertising or use of
                   special offers.

                   NB These points could count as Evaluation and
                   the Evaluation points as KAA.

                   NB A Level 3 response would typically consider
                   both `information gaps' and `irrational behaviour'.

                   NB There may be overlap between information
                   gaps and irrational behaviour as possible causes
                   of food waste.
Level    Mark  Descriptor
Level 1  0
Level 2  1-2   A completely inaccurate response.

Level 3  3-4   Displays isolated or imprecise knowledge and understanding
               of terms, concepts, theories and models.
         5-6   Use of generic or irrelevant information or examples.
               Descriptive approach which has no link between causes and
               consequences.

               Displays elements of knowledge and understanding of
               economic principles, concepts and theories.
               Applies economic ideas and relates them to economic
               problems in context, although does not focus on the broad
               elements of the question.
               A narrow response or the answer may lack balance.

               Demonstrates accurate knowledge and understanding of the
               concepts, principles and models.
               Ability to link knowledge and understanding in context using
               relevant and focused examples which are fully integrated.
               Economic ideas are applied appropriately to the broad
               elements of the question.
Question   Indicative content                                      Mark
Number                                                             (4)
6(d)                                          Evaluation 4
continued       Consideration of relative proportions of food

                    waste e.g. supermarkets appear favourable
                    compared to food suppliers and households.

            Other factors could cause food waste e.g.

                  Misleading advertising by firms so consumers
                     purchase food they do not want.

                  Transport and storage problems due to road
                     congestion / problems of importing food from
                     overseas.

            Consideration of whether it is rational to assume
               that consumers seek to maximise utility in
               allocating their expenditure / and firms seek to
               maximise profits in making production decisions.

            Long run information gaps may narrow and
               irrational behaviour may reduce e.g. improved
               labelling and social enterprise, advice to
               customers on how to store food and use leftovers
               or use of new technology to extend freshness of
               food.

           NB These points could count as KAA and the KAA as
           evaluation.

Level      Mark  Descriptor
Level 1    0
Level 2    1-2   No evaluative comments.

           3-4   Identification of generic evaluative comments without
                 supporting evidence/reference to context. No evidence of a
                 logical chain of reasoning.

                 Evaluative comments supported by relevant reasoning and
                 appropriate reference to context.
                 Evaluation recognises different viewpoints and/or is critical of
                 the evidence.
Question  Answer                                                     Mark
Number                                                               (9)
6(e)                   Knowledge 3, Application 3, Analysis 3

                   Problems of merger include:
               CMA may block this horizontal merger since the

                   combined firm has 27.4% market share/ exceeds
                   the 25% legal monopoly figure.
               Costs to the firms: possible diseconomies of scale
                   such as overlap between location of stores/
                   co-ordination of staff/ redundancies/
                   implementation of new IT system (different types
                   of diseconomies of scale may be awarded
                   separately).
               Impact of merger on consumer loyalty: the new
                   store may not deliver consumer loyalty, for
                   example, different brands between stores.
               Lack of synergies and cultural clash
               Underlying market conditions remain: consumers
                   changing their shopping habits and merger does
                   not address this issue.
               Impact on food suppliers: increased monopsony
                   pressure on suppliers may lead to reduced choice
                   of food suppliers. An increased risk of GCA
                   investigation.
               Consideration of problems of other mergers and
                   acquisitions: for example, BT takeover of EE.

          NB for a Level 3 response there must be reference to
          the context e.g. Figure 1 or Extract C.
Level    Mark  Descriptor
Level 1  0
Level 2  1-3   A completely inaccurate response.

Level 3  4-6   Displays isolated or imprecise knowledge and understanding
               of terms, concepts, theories and models.
         7-9   Use of generic or irrelevant information or examples.
               Descriptive approach which has no chains of reasoning or
               links between causes and consequences.

               Displays elements of knowledge and understanding of
               economic principles, concepts and theories.
               Applies economic ideas and relates them to economic
               problems in context, although does not focus on the broad
               elements of the question.
               A narrow response; chains of reasoning are developed but
               the answer may lack balance.

               Demonstrates accurate knowledge and understanding of the
               concepts, principles and models.
               Ability to link knowledge and understanding in context using
               relevant and focused examples which are fully integrated.
               Economic ideas are carefully selected and applied
               appropriately to economic issues and problems. The answer
               demonstrates logical and coherent chains of reasoning.
Question   Indicative content                                           Mark
Number                                                                  (6)
6(e)                                       Evaluation 6
continued
                There may be benefits which offset the problems,
                    such as
                         o different types of economies of scale e.g.
                              bulk purchase
                         o rationalisation of stores and employees
                              could lead to increased efficiency and
                              profitability
                         o increased market power

                CMA could permit merger as sufficient
                    competition still exists in the sector from online
                    shopping and the growth of discount stores.

                Prioritisation of problems with justification, for
                    example, a lot of money could be spent on the
                    proposed merger which is then blocked by CMA.

                Short-run and long run implications: enormous
                    upheaval in short run but sufficient cost savings
                    could be made in long run to make it worthwhile.

Level      Mark  Descriptor
Level 1    0
Level 2    1-2   No evaluative comments.

Level 3    3-4   Identification of generic evaluative comments without
                 supporting evidence/reference to context. No evidence of a
           5-6   logical chain of reasoning.

                 Evidence of evaluation of alternative approaches which is
                 unbalanced.
                 Evaluative comments with supporting evidence/reference to
                 context and a partially-developed chain of reasoning.

                 Evaluative comments supported by relevant chain of
                 reasoning and appropriate reference to context.
                 Evaluation recognises different viewpoints and/or is critical of
                 the evidence.
Question  Indicative content                                                    Mark
Number                                                                           (25)
7                          Knowledge 4, Application 4, Analysis 8

               Definition of a tax/ identification of an ad valorem tax.

                   Economic effects include:
               Increase in price and a reduction in demand for soft drinks

                   which contain sugar / increase in demand for healthy
                   drinks.
               Reduction of consumer surplus and producer surplus/
                   profits (may be shown on diagram)
               Tax acts to increase costs and may reduce profits.
               Increased investment in healthier drinks.
               Increase in tax revenue for government and impact on
                   healthcare services and other services, for example dental
                   care.
               Improvements in quality of healthcare among population -
                   fall in obesity, diabetes and heart disease. Reduced
                   pressure on healthcare services.
               A diagram of an indirect tax may be awarded, depicting an
                   increase in price, a decrease in quantity and the area of
                   tax collected.
               A relevant externality diagram depicting a reduction in
                   welfare loss.
               A relevant cost and revenue diagram depicting the impact
                   of an expenditure tax on firms.
               Increase in life expectancy/ the quality of life/ productivity
                   in the workforce.
               Impact on employment in the soft drinks industry/impact
                   on employment in substitute product markets.
               Impact on income distribution / regressive tax

                                                 Evaluation 9

               Significance of price elasticity of demand in determining
                   impact on price, quantity, employment and tax revenue.

               Consideration of the impact on substitutes/ application of
                   cross elasticity of demand e.g. switch to healthier
                   substitutes.

               Consideration of the incidence of tax on consumers and
                   producers.

               Difficulty in imposing the tax - different soft drinks
                   products with different sugar content.

               Extent of hidden/informal market.
               Time factor - long term implications for government

                   funding of pensions and healthcare.
               Consideration of price elasticity of supply e.g. the ability of

                   producers to switch to healthier drinks.
Knowledge, application and analysis

Level       Mark   Descriptor

            0      A completely inaccurate response.

Level 1     1-4    Displays isolated or imprecise knowledge and understanding

                   of terms, concepts, theories and models.

                   Use of generic or irrelevant information or examples.

                   Descriptive approach which has no chains of reasoning or

                   links between causes and consequences.

Level 2     5-8    Displays elements of knowledge and understanding of

                   economic principles, concepts and theories.

                   Applies economic ideas and relates them to economic

                   problems in context, although does not focus on the broad

                   elements of the question.

                   A narrow response or superficial, two stage chains of

                   reasoning only.

Level 3     9-12   Demonstrates accurate knowledge and understanding of the

                   concepts, principles and models.

                   Ability to apply economic concepts and relate them directly to

                   the broad elements of the question with evidence integrated

                   into the answer.

                   Analysis is clear and coherent, although it may lack balance.

                   Chains of reasoning are developed but the answer may lack

                   balance.

Level 4     13-16  Demonstrates precise knowledge and understanding of the

                   concepts, principles and models.

                   Ability to link knowledge and understanding in context using

                   appropriate examples. Analysis is relevant and focused with

                   evidence fully and reliably integrated.

                   Economic ideas are carefully selected and applied

                   appropriately to economic issues and problems. The answer

                   demonstrates logical and coherent chains of reasoning.

Evaluation  Mark   Descriptor
Level       0
            1-3    No evaluative comments.
Level 1
                   Identification of generic evaluative comments without
Level 2     4-6    supporting evidence/reference to context. No evidence of a
                   logical chain of reasoning.
Level 3     7-9
                   Evidence of evaluation of alternative approaches which is
                   unbalanced leading to unsubstantiated judgements.
                   Evaluative comments with supporting evidence/reference to
                   context and a partially-developed chain of reasoning.

                   Evaluative comments supported by relevant reasoning and
                   appropriate reference to context.
                   Evaluation recognises different viewpoints and is critical of
                   the evidence provided and/or the assumptions underlying the
                   analysis enabling informed judgements to be made.
Question  Indicative content                                                     Mark
Number                                                                           (25)
8                               Knowledge 4, Application 4, Analysis 8
               Explanation of revenue maximisation (for example, output

                   position where MR=0) and profit maximisation (for example,
                   output position where MR=MC).
               Diagrammatic analysis may be offered depicting the two
                   business objectives.

          NB revenue maximisation discussion may be considered as
          KAA and profit maximisation as EV or vice-versa. Mark the
          best approach as KAA and the other as EV.

                   Revenue maximisation:
               This could be more appropriate in large firms with a

                   separation of ownership from control e.g. supermarkets /
                   oligopoly.
               Directors may have salaries linked to revenue growth rather
                   than profits.
               Directors may seek greater security through larger market
                   share rather than higher profits.
               Revenue maximisation may be less likely to draw attention of
                   competition authorities, as price and profits will be lower.
               Accept a game theory approach if relevant.
               Short term need for cash e.g. to avoid bankruptcy or fund
                   attractive new opportunities

          NB for a Level 4 response, candidates must refer to a
          specific INDUSTRY in their answer.

                   Evaluation 9
                   Profit maximisation can be used as a counter argument to
                   points above:
               Profit maximisation could be more appropriate in smaller
                   firms where there is no separation of ownership from control
                   e.g. small independent grocery stores / monopolistic
                   competition.
               Profit maximisation could be more appropriate in a monopoly
                   market with high entry barriers so little possibility of
                   competition.
               Rational business owners are expected to seek to maximise
                   profits. Role of shareholders in expecting high share prices
                   and dividend.

                    Other points include
               Depends on the type of industry e.g. hairdressing or banking

                   may have different goals.
               A contestable market may influence the objectives.
               Business owners and directors are not always rational.
               Conflicting objectives by different pressure groups within

                   firms may lead to a compromise objective such as profit
                   satisficing.
          Difficulty in firms achieving revenue maximisation or profit
             maximisation in terms of calculating marginal revenues and
             marginal costs from production.

          Revenue maximisation and profit maximisation may require
             frequent price changes which may lead to falling customer
             demand.

          Lack of continuity in small businesses means profit
             maximisation may not be sustained even if a business
             objective.

Knowledge, application and analysis

Level    Mark   Descriptor

         0      A completely inaccurate response.

Level 1  1-4    Displays isolated or imprecise knowledge and understanding

                of terms, concepts, theories and models.

                Use of generic or irrelevant information or examples.

                Descriptive approach which has no chains of reasoning or

                links between causes and consequences.

Level 2  5-8    Displays elements of knowledge and understanding of

                economic principles, concepts and theories.

                Applies economic ideas and relates them to economic

                problems in context, although does not focus on the broad

                elements of the question.

                A narrow response or superficial, two stage chains of

                reasoning only.

Level 3  9-12   Demonstrates accurate knowledge and understanding of the

                concepts, principles and models.

                Ability to apply economic concepts and relate them directly to

                the broad elements of the question with evidence integrated

                into the answer.

                Analysis is clear and coherent, although it may lack balance.

                Chains of reasoning are developed but the answer may lack

                balance.

Level 4  13-16  Demonstrates precise knowledge and understanding of the
                concepts, principles and models.
                Ability to link knowledge and understanding in context using
                appropriate examples. Analysis is relevant and focused with
                evidence fully and reliably integrated.
                Economic ideas are carefully selected and applied
                appropriately to economic issues and problems. The answer
                demonstrates logical and coherent chains of reasoning.
Evaluation  Mark  Descriptor
Level       0
Level 1     1-3   No evaluative comments.
Level 2
            4-6   Identification of generic evaluative comments without
Level 3           supporting evidence/reference to context. No evidence of a
            7-9   logical chain of reasoning.

                  Evidence of evaluation of alternative approaches which is
                  unbalanced leading to unsubstantiated judgements.
                  Evaluative comments with supporting evidence/reference to
                  context and a partially developed chain of reasoning.

                  Evaluative comments supported by relevant reasoning and
                  appropriate reference to context.
                  Evaluation recognises different viewpoints and is critical of
                  the evidence provided and/or the assumptions underlying the
                  analysis enabling informed judgements to be made.
Pearson Education Limited. Registered company number 872828
with its registered office at 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, United Kingdom
